Sustained immunity update (#770)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/10.diagnostics.md

An early study (initially released on _medRxiv_ on February 25, 2020) presented a chemiluminescence immunoassay to a synthetic peptide derived from the amino acid sequence of the SARS-CoV-2 _S_ protein [@doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa243].
This method was highly specific to SARS-CoV-2 and detected IgM in 57.2% and IgG in 71.4% and 57.2% of sera samples from 276 confirmed COVID-19 patients.
They reported that they could detect IgG within two days of the onset of fever and were not able to detect IgM any earlier, a pattern they compared to findings in MERS.
Since then, several trials have reported the potential protective effect of antibodies in convalescent plasma obtained from recovered COVID-19 patients to treat critically ill COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1172/jci138745; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4783; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2031893].

<!--TODO: add https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-020-0965-6#Sec9 and evalute reports of recurrence.-->
Evidence to date suggests that sustained immunity to SARS-CoV-2 occurs for a period of at least 6-8 months [@doi:10.3201/eid2703.204543; @doi:10.1126/science.abf4063; @doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.abf8891].

> One study assessed sustained immunity using blood samples from 188 COVID-19 positive patients at various time points between 6 and 240 days post-symptom onset, whereby some patients were also assessed longitudinally [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4063]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One study assessed sustained immunity using 245 blood samples from 188 COVID-19 positive patients  [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4063]. 
The samples were collected at various time points between 6 and 240 days post-symptom onset, meaning some patients were assessed longitudinally. 
Of the samples, 43 were collected at least 6 months after symptom onset.
```

> One study assessed sustained immunity using blood samples from 188 COVID-19 positive patients at various time points between 6 and 240 days post-symptom onset, whereby some patients were also assessed longitudinally to determine [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4063]. 

Reviewer 2: does this sentence end early?

Reviewer 2: or late!
```suggestion
One study assessed sustained immunity using blood samples from 188 COVID-19 positive patients at various time points between 6 and 240 days post-symptom onset, whereby some patients were also assessed longitudinally [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4063]. 
```

Author: My bad! Must have missed it when editing

> After 1 month, 98% of patients were seropositive for spike IgG. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After 1 month, 98% of patients were seropositive for Spike IgG. 
```

> Moreover, spike IgG titers were stable and heterogeneous among patients over a period of 6 to 8 months post-symptom onset, whereby 90% of subjects were seropositive at 6 months.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, Spike IgG titers were stable and heterogeneous among patients over a period of 6 to 8 months post-symptom onset, with 90% of subjects seropositive at 6 months.
```
Is this saying that patients tended to follow their own, heterogeneous patterns over 6-8 months?  Also, it seems like most of their data was collected within 6 months, so we might want to be clear about the sample size for the 90%!

Similarly, at 6 to 8 months 88% of patients were seropositive for receptor binding domain (RBD) IgG and 90% were seropositive for SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Similarly, at 6 to 8 months 88% of patients were seropositive for receptor binding domain (RBD) IgG and 90% were seropositive for SARS-C0V-2 neutralizing antibodies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, at 6 to 8 months 88% of patients were seropositive for receptor binding domain (RBD) IgG and 90% were seropositive for SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies.
```

Memory B cells and memory T cells were also measured.

> SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific memory B cell levels steadily rose over the first 120 days post-symptom onset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SARS-CoV-2 Spike-specific memory B cell levels steadily rose over the first 120 days following symptom onset. 
```

> RBD-specific memory B cells were detected in COVID-19 patients 90 days post-symptom onset in previous studies [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.029; @doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.abf8891], this study confirms these finding and shows that these cells steadily increase for over 4-5 months post-symptom onset [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4063].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RBD-specific memory B cells had been detected in COVID-19 patients 90 days post-symptom onset in previous studies [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.029; @doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.abf8891], and this study confirms these finding and shows that these cells steadily increase over the 4-5 months post-symptom onset [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4063].
```

However, SARS-CoV-2 memory CD8+ T cells were slightly decreased (50%) 6 months post-symptom onset. 
In this same subset of COVID-19 patients, 93% of subjects had detectable levels of SARS-CoV-2 memory CD4+ T cells, of which 42% had > 1% SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells.
At 6 months, 92% of patients were positive for SARS-CoV-2 memory CD4+ T cells.
Indeed, the spike-specific memory CD4+ T cells abundance over time were similar to the overall SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4063].
T cell immunity to SARS-CoV-2 at 6-8 months post-symptom onset has also been confirmed by others [@doi:10.1101/2020.11.01.362319; @doi:10.1101/2020.12.08.416636].
In another study, T cell reactivity to SARS-CoV-2 epitopes was also detected in some individuals never before exposed to SARS-CoV-2. 
This indicates that there is potential for cross-reactive T cell recognition between SARS-CoV-2 and pre-existing circulating coronaviruses that are responsible for the “common cold” [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.015], but further research is required.

> There is concern that immunity may wane over time as there have been several reported cases of reinfection confirmed via genomic analysis of variants associated with infection in patients [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30764-7; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1451; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1275].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is concern that immunity may wane over time, as there several reported cases of reinfection have been confirmed via genomic analysis that revealed distinct variants of SARS-CoV-2 within a single patient [@doi:10/ghfgkt; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1451; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1275].
```
Does this work? I don't think we go into the evolution in this paper, so trying to just make a nod to how they were able to tell!

Author: There is concern that immunity may wane over time, as several reported cases of reinfection have been confirmed via genomic analysis that revealed distinct variants of SARS-CoV-2 within a single patient 

Delete "there"before several I think

What they mean by the genomic analysis here is that there was slight differences between the SARS-CoV-2 variant that caused the patients first infection, versus the second infection. They aren't necessarily referring to a different lineage such as B.1.1.7 etc. They just mean that they are sure it was a different infection. Does that make sense?

> Further research is required to determine the full extent of what level of sustained immunity can be achieved following SARS-CoV-2 infection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further research is required to determine the full extent to which sustained immunity can be and is typically achieved following SARS-CoV-2 infection
```

> Furthermore, it is unclear what repercussions there may be in terms of disease severity for patients [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30783-0] and what reinfection implies for vaccine development and long-term efficacy [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1121-z; @doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.571481]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, it is unclear whether previous infection may carry repercussions in terms of disease severity for patients [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30783-0] and what implications the possibility of reinfection holds for vaccine development and the long-term efficacy of vaccines [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1121-z; @doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.571481]. 
```

Indeed, the spike-specific memory CD4+ T cells abundance over time were similar to the overall SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4063].
T cell immunity to SARS-CoV-2 at 6-8 months post-symptom onset has also been confirmed by others [@doi:10.1101/2020.11.01.362319; @doi:10.1101/2020.12.08.416636].
In another study, T cell reactivity to SARS-CoV-2 epitopes was also detected in some individuals never before exposed to SARS-CoV-2. 
This indicates that there is potential for cross-reactive T cell recognition between SARS-CoV-2 and pre-existing circulating coronaviruses that are responsible for the “common cold” [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.015], but further research is required.
There is concern that immunity may wane over time, as there several reported cases of reinfection have been confirmed via genomic analysis that revealed distinct variants of SARS-CoV-2 within a single patient [@doi:10/ghfgkt; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1451; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1275].
Further research is required to determine the full extent to which sustained immunity can be and is typically achieved following SARS-CoV-2 infection

> Furthermore, it is unclear whether previous infection may carry repercussions in terms of disease severity for patients [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30783-0] and what implications the possibility of reinfection holds for vaccine development and the long-term efficacy of vaccines [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1121-z; @doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.571481]. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Furthermore, it is unclear whether previous infection may carry repercussions in terms of disease severity for patients [@doi:10/fscx] and what implications the possibility of reinfection holds for vaccine development and the long-term efficacy of vaccines [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1121-z; @doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.571481]. 
```
